---
title: Favorite music releases of 2010
author: rlburns
layout: post
permalink: /2010/12/music-of-2010/
categories:
  - Uncategorized
---
# 

In making this list I realized that 2010 was a great year for music. Several follow-up CDs either met or exceeded expectations, many bands settled well into new sounds, and other awesome new bands arose. Below is a list of some of the new releases I heard this year. Unfortunately I couldn't list more due to time constraints, but these were the most prominent releases of the year for me. 

Top 20 Favorites
19. Broken Social Scene - Forgiveness Rock Record  
18. The Hundred in the Hands - The Hundred in the Hands  
17. Local Natives - Gorilla Manor  
16. Adam Green - Minor Love  
15. Toro y Moi - Causers of This  
14. No Age - Everything in Between  
13. Swans - My Father Will Guide Me Up A Rope To The Sky  
12. Ariel Pink's Haunted Graffiti - Before Today  
11. LCD Soundsystem - This Is Happening  
10. Eluvium - Similies  
9. Caribou - Swim  
8. Joanna Newsom - Have One on Me  
7. Laura Veirs - July Flame  
6. Fursaxa - Mycorrhizae Realm  
5. Beach House - Teen Dream  
4. Yellow Swans - Going Places  
3. Arcade Fire - The Suburbs  
2. Tame Impala - Innerspeaker  
1. Deerhunter - Halcyon Digest

Runners-up
1. The Black Keys - Brothers (way talented and catchy, but not quite my style)  
2. The North Sea - Bloodlines (growing on me)  
3. Delta Spirit - History from Below (great CD, but for some reason quickly fell out of my playlist)  
4. Sufjan Stevens - Age of Adz (maybe it was bad timing for me, but I never really got into it, sadly...)  
5. The Books - The Way Out (just discovered this today and loved it, but not enough times to put in top 20)  
6. The Roots - How I Got Over (only had a chance to hear it once and it was great, but couldn't put it in top 20)  
7. The Magnetic Fields - Realism (good, not great)

Releases others loved but I was more ambivalent toward
1. Yeasayer - Odd Blood  
2. MGMT - Congratulations  
3. Girl Talk - All Day

Releases I wanted to hear but haven't had a chance yet
1. Kurt Vile - Square Shells  
2. Horse Feathers - Thistled Spring  
3. Gaslight Anthem - American Slang  
4. Brian McBride - The Effective Disconnect  
5. Tristeza - Paisajes  
6. Rafael Anton Irisarri - The North Bend  
7. Ratatat - LP4 (Thanks for the tip, Matt!)  
8. The New Pornographers - Together (same as \#6!)