---
title: Busy summer 2018
author: rlburns
layout: post
permalink: /2018/06/sum18/
categories:
  - academic
  - news
  - conferences
  - research
---

For those of you wondering how/why I missed your email over the last couple weeks, let me first apologize, and then give you a sense of what my summer has been like so far. In addition to radical personal changes, I'm also tremendously busy professionally.  

-I'm now managing -- depending on how you count them -- 3 separate research projects: Digitizing Humanitarianism, Engaging Open Data Research, and Data Practices/Sex-seeking apps. EODR has a few separate sub-projects, and DH has two research assistants helping over the summer.  
-I just returned from Jena, Germany, where I gave a talk at the workshop Digitization and Globalization -- \(New\) Geoinformation Relationships in the World. My talk was entitled, "...But Who Will Care for the Smart City?", a paper I'm co-authoring with Max Andrucki at Temple.  
-Next month I travel to the Technology, Law, and Society Summer Institute at UC Irvine. While there I will work through some of the key ideas of my forthcoming book proposal for *Digitizing Humanitarianism: New Politics of Humanitarian Intervention in a Networked World*, which I hope to submit by the end of the summer. I'm thrilled to be a part of this event!  
-In July I return to Europe to attend the conference EASST (European Association for the Study of Science & Technology), in Lancaster, UK. I'm presenting the paper I co-authored with my research assistant last fall on the database ethnography. I'm going to try to hook up with some colleagues in Exeter to deliver a seminar there, as well - make the most of the trip east.
-One of EODR's spin-off projects is a collaboration with staff at the City of Calgary to explore data sharing agreements across North America. It's a really rich collaboration, facilitated through the Urban Alliance.

And that's all just original research! Not even counting publications, student mentoring, other research partnerships with which I'm affiliated, service activities, and so on... Busy, busy, busy, but all good stuff.